7.0.0-alpha.9 (#11731)
mui/mui-x: CHANGELOG.md

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 7.0.0-alpha.9
_Jan 18, 2024_

We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 11 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

- 🎁 Allow to filter non-filterable columns programmatically (#11538) @MBilalShafi

> - 🚀 Make `PickersTextField` and its dependencies public (#11581) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer: We can drop this one, these components alone are not useful to the end user

- 🌍 Add Croatian (hr-HR), Portuguese (pt-PT), and Chinese (Hong Kong) (zh-HK) locales (#11668) on the Data Grid @BCaspari
- 🐞 Bugfixes

### Breaking changes

> 

Author: was wondering if we should add a `#### Data Grid` here, but since there are only grid BCs this did not make much sense

Reviewer: The grid breaking changes should be an h4 **inside** the grid section :+1:

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@7.0.0-alpha.9`, plus:

- [DataGridPremium] Allow aggregation to be applied for non-aggregable columns (#11574) @MBilalShafi
- [DataGridPremium] Allow programmatically grouping non-groupable columns (#11539) @MBilalShafi

### Date Pickers

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers@7.0.0-alpha.9`

- [fields] Make `PickersTextField` and its dependencies public (#11581) @flaviendelangle
- [fields] Support farsi digits (#11639) @flaviendelangle
- [pickers] Fix AdapterLuxon `getWeekNumber` behavior (#11697) @LukasTy
- [pickers] Stop root exporting `locales` (#11612) @LukasTy

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers-pro@7.0.0-alpha.9` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-date-pickers@7.0.0-alpha.9`.

### Charts / `@mui/x-charts@7.0.0-alpha.9`

- [charts] Do not propagate `innerRadius` and `outerRadius` to the DOM (#11689) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Fix default `stackOffset` for `LineChart` (#11647) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Remove a TS ignore (#11688) @alexfauquette

> ### Tree View / `@mui/x-tree-view@7.0.0-alpha.9`

Reviewer: ````suggestion
### Tree View / `@mui/x-tree-view@7.0.0-alpha.9`

#### Breaking changes

- The `expandIcon` / `defaultExpandIcon` props, used to expand the children of a node (rendered when this node is collapsed),
is now defined as a slot both on the Tree View and the Tree Item components.

  If you were using the `ChevronRight` icon from `@mui/icons-material`,
  you can stop passing it to your component because it is now the default value:
  
  ```diff
  -import ChevronRightIcon from '@mui/icons-material/ChevronRight';
  
   <SimpleTreeView
  -  defaultExpandIcon={<ChevronRightIcon />}
   >
     {items}
   </SimpleTreeView>
  ```
  
  If you were passing another icon to your Tree View component,
  you need to use the new `expandIcon` slot on this component:
  
  ```diff
   <SimpleTreeView
  -  defaultExpandIcon={<MyCustomExpandIcon />}
  +  slots={{ expandIcon: MyCustomExpandIcon }}
   >
     {items}
   </SimpleTreeView>
  ```
  
  If you were passing another icon to your Tree Item component,
  you need to use the new `expandIcon` slot on this component:
  
  ```diff
    <SimpleTreeView>
      <TreeItem
        nodeId="1"
        label="Node 1"
  -     expandIcon={<MyCustomExpandIcon />}
  +     slots={{ expandIcon: MyCustomExpandIcon }}
      />
    </SimpleTreeView>
  ```
- The `collapseIcon` / `defaultCollapseIcon` props, used to collapse the children of a node (rendered when this node is expanded),
is now defined as a slot both on the Tree View and the Tree Item components.

  If you were using the `ExpandMore` icon from `@mui/icons-material`,
  you can stop passing it to your component because it is now the default value:
  
  ```diff
  - import ExpandMoreIcon from '@mui/icons-material/ExpandMore';
  
    <SimpleTreeView
  -   defaultCollapseIcon={<ExpandMoreIcon />}
    >
      {items}
    </SimpleTreeView>
  ```
  
  If you were passing another icon to your Tree View component,
  you need to use the new `collapseIcon` slot on this component:
  
  ```diff
    <SimpleTreeView
  -   defaultCollapseIcon={<MyCustomCollapseIcon />}
  +   slots={{ collapseIcon: MyCustomCollapseIcon }}
    >
      {items}
    </SimpleTreeView>
  ```
  
  If you were passing another icon to your Tree Item component,
  you need to use the new `collapseIcon` slot on this component:
  
  ```diff
    <SimpleTreeView>
      <TreeItem
        nodeId="1"
        label="Node 1"
  -     collapseIcon={<MyCustomCollapseIcon />}
  +     slots={{ collapseIcon: MyCustomCollapseIcon }}
      />
    </SimpleTreeView>
```

- The `useTreeItem` hook has been renamed `useTreeItemState`.
  This will help create a new headless version of the `TreeItem` component based on a future `useTreeItem` hook.
  
  ```diff
  -import { TreeItem, useTreeItem } from '@mui/x-tree-view/TreeItem';
  +import { TreeItem, useTreeItemState } from '@mui/x-tree-view/TreeItem';
  
   const CustomContent = React.forwardRef((props, ref) => {
  -  const { disabled } = useTreeItem(props.nodeId);
  +  const { disabled } = useTreeItemState(props.nodeId);
  
     // Render some UI
   });
  
   function App() {
     return (
       <SimpleTreeView>
         <TreeItem ContentComponent={CustomContent} />
       </SimpleTreeView>
     )
   }
  ```

````

- [TreeView] Adjust expansion and selection docs (#11723) @noraleonte
- [TreeView] Improve plugin signature definition (#11665) @flaviendelangle
- [TreeView] Make each plugin responsible for its context value (#11623) @flaviendelangle
- [TreeView] Pass through `Theme` generic to variants (#11480) @dhulme
- [TreeView] Rename `useTreeItem` to `useTreeItemState` (#11712) @flaviendelangle

### Docs

- [docs] Clean the pickers migration guide (#11694) @flaviendelangle
- [docs] Cleanup and fix Pickers Playground styling (#11700) @LukasTy
- [docs] First draft of the Tree View custom plugin doc (#11564) @flaviendelangle
- [docs] Fix Pickers migration syntax and diffs (#11695) @LukasTy
- [docs] Improve codemod for v7 (#11650) @oliviertassinari

> - [docs] Improve data grid `pageSizeOptions` prop documentation (#11682) @oliviertassinari

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [docs] Improve data grid `pageSizeOptions` prop documentation (#11682) @oliviertassinari
- [docs] Parse markdown on API docs demo titles (#11728) @LukasTy
```

- [docs] Remove the description from the `className` prop (#11693) @oliviertassinari

> - [docs] Uplift `SimpleTreeView` customization examples (#11424) @noraleonte

Reviewer: This could justify a highlight

- [docs] Uplift the Date Pickers playground (#11555) @danilo-leal

### Core

> - [core] Bump `@mui/material` peer dependency for all packages (#11692) @LukasTy

Reviewer: This one should be added to the breaking changes of each packages IMHO

Author: @LukasTy do you want to write a short BC text for that?

Reviewer 2: IMHO, we could add a single BC at the top of the changelog encompassing all the packages to reduce pointless noise. This "BC" is tiny and could impact only a minuscule amount of users anyway. 🙈

Reviewer: As you want, I think roughly nobody goes through the full CHANGELOG during alpha, since we have the migration guide who acts as an improve version.
So I would not spend to much time thinking about it :laughing:

- [core] Make `karma` run in parallel (#11571) @romgrk

> - [core] make karma-parallel run under a new command (#11716) @romgrk

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [core] make `karma-parallel` run under a new command (#11716) @romgrk
```

> - [tree view] Add `slots` and `slotProps` on the Tree View components (#11664) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer: Should be moved to the tree view, sorry for the wrong title formatting

> - [tree view] Explore a better plugin model API (#11567) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer: Should be moved to the tree view, sorry for the wrong title formatting

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@7.0.0-alpha.9`, plus:

- [DataGridPremium] Allow aggregation to be applied for non-aggregable columns (#11574) @MBilalShafi
- [DataGridPremium] Allow programmatically grouping non-groupable columns (#11539) @MBilalShafi

### Date Pickers

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers@7.0.0-alpha.9`

- [fields] Make `PickersTextField` and its dependencies public (#11581) @flaviendelangle
- [fields] Support farsi digits (#11639) @flaviendelangle
- [pickers] Fix AdapterLuxon `getWeekNumber` behavior (#11697) @LukasTy
- [pickers] Stop root exporting `locales` (#11612) @LukasTy

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers-pro@7.0.0-alpha.9` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-date-pickers@7.0.0-alpha.9`.

### Charts / `@mui/x-charts@7.0.0-alpha.9`

- [charts] Do not propagate `innerRadius` and `outerRadius` to the DOM (#11689) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Fix default `stackOffset` for `LineChart` (#11647) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Remove a TS ignore (#11688) @alexfauquette

> ### Tree View / `@mui/x-tree-view@7.0.0-alpha.9`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Tree View
```

  +   slots={{ collapseIcon: MyCustomCollapseIcon }}
    >
      {items}
    </SimpleTreeView>
  ```
  
  If you were passing another icon to your Tree Item component,
  you need to use the new `collapseIcon` slot on this component:
  
  ```diff
    <SimpleTreeView>
      <TreeItem
        nodeId="1"
        label="Node 1"
  -     collapseIcon={<MyCustomCollapseIcon />}
  +     slots={{ collapseIcon: MyCustomCollapseIcon }}
      />
    </SimpleTreeView>
```

- The `useTreeItem` hook has been renamed `useTreeItemState`.
  This will help create a new headless version of the `TreeItem` component based on a future `useTreeItem` hook.
  
  ```diff
  -import { TreeItem, useTreeItem } from '@mui/x-tree-view/TreeItem';
  +import { TreeItem, useTreeItemState } from '@mui/x-tree-view/TreeItem';
  
   const CustomContent = React.forwardRef((props, ref) => {
  -  const { disabled } = useTreeItem(props.nodeId);
  +  const { disabled } = useTreeItemState(props.nodeId);
  
     // Render some UI
   });
  
   function App() {
     return (
       <SimpleTreeView>
         <TreeItem ContentComponent={CustomContent} />
       </SimpleTreeView>
     )
   }

>   ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ```
  
  - The `parentIcon` prop has been removed from the Tree View components.
  
  If you were passing an icon to your Tree View component,
  you can achieve the same behavior
  by passing the same icon to both the `collapseIcon` and the `expandIcon` slots on this component:
  
  ```diff
    <SimpleTreeView
  -   defaultParentIcon={<MyCustomParentIcon />}
  +   slots={{ collapseIcon: MyCustomParentIcon, expandIcon: MyCustomParentIcon }}
    >
      {items}
    </SimpleTreeView>
  ```
  
  #### Define `endIcon`
  
  The `endIcon` / `defaultEndIcon` props, rendered next to an item without children,
  is now defined as a slot both on the Tree View and the Tree Item components.
  
  If you were passing an icon to your Tree View component,
  you need to use the new `endIcon` slot on this component:
  
  ```diff
    <SimpleTreeView
  -   defaultEndIcon={<MyCustomEndIcon />}
  +   slots={{ endIcon: MyCustomEndIcon }}
    >
      {items}
    </SimpleTreeView>
  ```
  
  If you were passing an icon to your Tree Item component,
  you need to use the new `endIcon` slot on this component:
  
  ```diff
    <SimpleTreeView>
      <TreeItem
        nodeId="1"
        label="Node 1"
  -     endIcon={<MyCustomEndIcon />}
  +     slots={{ endIcon: MyCustomEndIcon }}
      />
    </SimpleTreeView>
  ```
  
  - The `icon` prop, rendered next to an item without children,
  is now defined as a slot on the Tree Item component.
  
  If you were passing an icon to your Tree Item component,
  you need to use the new `icon` slot on this component:
  
  ```diff
    <SimpleTreeView>
      <TreeItem
        nodeId="1"
        label="Node 1"
  -     icon={<MyCustomIcon />}
  +     slots={{ icon: MyCustomIcon }}
      />
    </SimpleTreeView>
  ```
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `@mui/x-tree-view@7.0.0-alpha.9`
```

I think the shortcut of putting the product line AND the package name on the same line when we have only 1 package is a bad idea because

1. It's not consistent with the other packages
2. When we have BCs we don't have the clean structure anymore, the PRs end up being in the BCs

Reviewer: cc @alexfauquette , I think it's in the changelog script

- [TreeView] Adjust expansion and selection docs (#11723) @noraleonte
- [TreeView] Improve plugin signature definition (#11665) @flaviendelangle

> - [TreeView] Make each plugin responsible for its context value (#11623) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [TreeView] Make each plugin responsible for its context value (#11623) @flaviendelangle
- [TreeView] Migrate remaining icon props to slots (#11713) @flaviendelangle
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 7.0.0-alpha.9

_Jan 18, 2024_

We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 11 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

> - 🎁 Allow to filter non-filterable columns programmatically (#11538) @MBilalShafi

Reviewer 3: Agreed 👍

- 🚀 Uplift the `SimpleTreeView` customization examples (#11424) @noraleonte
- 🌍 Add Croatian (hr-HR), Portuguese (pt-PT), and Chinese (Hong Kong) (zh-HK) locales (#11668) on the Data Grid @BCaspari

> - 🐞 Bugfixes

Reviewer 2: WDYT about such mention @michelengelen @flaviendelangle?
```suggestion
- 🐞 Bugfixes
- 💔 Bump `@mui/material` peer dependency for all packages (#11692) @LukasTy
  The minimum required version of `@mui/material` is now `5.15.0`.
```

Reviewer: Look good :+1:

### Data Grid

#### Breaking changes

- Non-filterable columns could now be filtered programmatically by controlling or initialing `filterModel`, or by updating the `filterModel` by API method `apiRef.current.setFilterModel`.

> - The `ariaV7` experimental flag has been removed and the Data Grid now uses the improved accessibility implementation by default.

Reviewer 4: Definitely worth linking the said "improved accessibility" stuff here.

Author: @cherniavskii do we have (a collection of) links for this?

Reviewer 5: There is a list of changes below

  If you were using the `ariaV7` flag, you can remove it from the `experimentalFeatures` prop:

  ```diff
  -<DataGrid experimentalFeatures={{ ariaV7: true }} />
  +<DataGrid />
  ```

  The most notable changes that might affect your application or tests are:

  - The `role="grid"` attribute along with related ARIA attributes are now applied to the inner `div` element instead of the root `div` element:

    ```diff
    -<div class="MuiDataGrid-root" role="grid" aria-colcount="5" aria-rowcount="101" aria-multiselectable="false">
    +<div class="MuiDataGrid-root">
       <div class="MuiDataGrid-toolbarContainer"></div>
    -    <div class="MuiDataGrid-main"></div>
    +    <div class="MuiDataGrid-main" role="grid" aria-colcount="5" aria-rowcount="101" aria-multiselectable="false"></div>
       <div class="MuiDataGrid-footerContainer"></div>
     </div>
    ```

>   - When [Tree data](/x/react-data-grid/tree-data/) feature is used, the grid role is now `role="treegrid"` instead of `role="grid"`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - When the [Tree data](/x/react-data-grid/tree-data/) feature is used, the grid role is now `role="treegrid"` instead of `role="grid"`.
```

>   - When the [Tree data](/x/react-data-grid/tree-data/) feature is used, the grid role is now `role="treegrid"` instead of `role="grid"`.

Author: ```suggestion
  - When the [Tree data](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/tree-data/) feature is used, the grid role is now `role="treegrid"` instead of `role="grid"`.
```

  - The Data Grid cells now have `role="gridcell"` instead of `role="cell"`.

> - Non-groupable columns could now be grouped programmatically to create read-only row groups by controlling or initializing `rowGroupingModel`, or by updating the `rowGroupingModel` by API method `apiRef.current.setRowGroupingModel`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Non-groupable columns can now be grouped programmatically to create read-only row groups by controlling or initializing `rowGroupingModel`, or by updating the `rowGroupingModel` by API method `apiRef.current.setRowGroupingModel`.
```

- [DataGrid] Sticky headers (#10059) @romgrk
- [DataGrid] Wrap toolbar buttons with tooltip (#11357) @MBilalShafi
- [l10n] Add Croatian (hr-HR), Portuguese (pt-PT), and Chinese (Hong Kong) (zh-HK) locales (#11668) @BCaspari

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@7.0.0-alpha.9` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid@7.0.0-alpha.9`, plus:

- [DataGridPro] Allow non-pinnable columns to be pinned programmatically (#11680) @MBilalShafi

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-premium@7.0.0-alpha.9` [![premium](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg-link 'Premium plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@7.0.0-alpha.9`, plus:

- [DataGridPremium] Allow aggregation to be applied for non-aggregable columns (#11574) @MBilalShafi
- [DataGridPremium] Allow programmatically grouping non-groupable columns (#11539) @MBilalShafi

### Date Pickers

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers@7.0.0-alpha.9`

- [fields] Make `PickersTextField` and its dependencies public (#11581) @flaviendelangle
- [fields] Support farsi digits (#11639) @flaviendelangle
- [pickers] Fix AdapterLuxon `getWeekNumber` behavior (#11697) @LukasTy

> - [pickers] Stop root exporting `locales` (#11612) @LukasTy

Reviewer: In case you don't know, you can use a quadruple "`" when you want to create a block that contains another block

> - [pickers] Stop root exporting `locales` (#11612) @LukasTy

Reviewer 2: No, I didn't know—this is a revelation! 👍 🙌 
Thanks. 🙇

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers-pro@7.0.0-alpha.9` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-date-pickers@7.0.0-alpha.9`.

### Charts / `@mui/x-charts@7.0.0-alpha.9`

- [charts] Do not propagate `innerRadius` and `outerRadius` to the DOM (#11689) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Fix default `stackOffset` for `LineChart` (#11647) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Remove a TS ignore (#11688) @alexfauquette

### Tree View

#### Breaking changes

> - The `expandIcon` / `defaultExpandIcon` props, used to expand the children of a node (rendered when this node is collapsed),

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The `expandIcon` / `defaultExpandIcon` props, used to expand the children of a node (rendered when it is collapsed),
```

is now defined as a slot both on the Tree View and the Tree Item components.

  If you were using the `ChevronRight` icon from `@mui/icons-material`,
  you can stop passing it to your component because it is now the default value:

  ```diff
  -import ChevronRightIcon from '@mui/icons-material/ChevronRight';
  
   <SimpleTreeView
  -  defaultExpandIcon={<ChevronRightIcon />}
   >
     {items}
   </SimpleTreeView>
  ```

  If you were passing another icon to your Tree View component,
  you need to use the new `expandIcon` slot on this component:

  ```diff
   <SimpleTreeView
  -  defaultExpandIcon={<MyCustomExpandIcon />}
  +  slots={{ expandIcon: MyCustomExpandIcon }}
   >
     {items}
   </SimpleTreeView>
  ```

  If you were passing another icon to your Tree Item component,
  you need to use the new `expandIcon` slot on this component:

  ```diff
    <SimpleTreeView>
      <TreeItem
        nodeId="1"
        label="Node 1"
  -     expandIcon={<MyCustomExpandIcon />}
  +     slots={{ expandIcon: MyCustomExpandIcon }}
      />
    </SimpleTreeView>
  ```

> - The `collapseIcon` / `defaultCollapseIcon` props, used to collapse the children of a node (rendered when this node is expanded),

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The `collapseIcon` / `defaultCollapseIcon` props, used to collapse the children of a node (rendered when it is expanded),
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 7.0.0-alpha.9

> _Jan 18, 2024_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Jan 19, 2024_
```

We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 11 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

> - 🎁 Allow to filter non-filterable columns programmatically (#11538) @MBilalShafi

Reviewer 3: @romgrk I feel one like can't do justice to the improvement, a blogpost would feel much better, feel free to rephrase or add more information though
```suggestion
- 🎁 The Data Grid headers are now sticky - which brings immense improvements to scrolling, state management, and overall performance of the grid
- ⚙️ The Data Grid disabled column-specific features like (filtering, sorting, grouping, etc) could now be accessed programmatically. See the related [docs](https://next.mui.com/x/react-data-grid/api-object/#access-the-disabled-column-features) section.
```

> - 🎁 The Data Grid headers are now sticky - which brings immense improvements to scrolling, state management, and overall performance of the grid

Reviewer 6: I think we can abstract the solution here, specially considering we may have a gif to showcase.

```suggestion
- 🎁 The Data Grid headers have been refactored to bring immense improvements to scrolling, state management, and overall performance of the grid.
```

- 🚀 Uplift the `SimpleTreeView` customization examples (#11424) @noraleonte
- 🌍 Add Croatian (hr-HR), Portuguese (pt-PT), and Chinese (Hong Kong) (zh-HK) locales (#11668) on the Data Grid @BCaspari
- 🐞 Bugfixes
- 💔 Bump `@mui/material` peer dependency for all packages (#11692) @LukasTy
  The minimum required version of `@mui/material` is now `5.15.0`.

### Data Grid

#### Breaking changes

> - Non-filterable columns can now be filtered programmatically by controlling or initialing `filterModel` or by updating the `filterModel` by API method `apiRef.current.setFilterModel`.

Reviewer 3: The generic breaking change on line 80 should be enough I guess.
```suggestion
```

> #### Breaking changes

Reviewer 6: For the breaking changes, we need a special note for the Sticky headers.

We need to communicate that there's a potential visual breaking change with the column headers' background. We need to communicate this and point to a workaround. Do we have something concrete on that @romgrk?

Reviewer 7: No I haven't found a way to allow transparency. I'm not sure how possible it will be.

  If you were using the `ariaV7` flag, you can remove it from the `experimentalFeatures` prop:

  ```diff
  -<DataGrid experimentalFeatures={{ ariaV7: true }} />
  +<DataGrid />
  ```

  The most notable changes that might affect your application or tests are:

  - The `role="grid"` attribute along with related ARIA attributes are now applied to the inner `div` element instead of the root `div` element:

    ```diff
    -<div class="MuiDataGrid-root" role="grid" aria-colcount="5" aria-rowcount="101" aria-multiselectable="false">
    +<div class="MuiDataGrid-root">
       <div class="MuiDataGrid-toolbarContainer"></div>
    -    <div class="MuiDataGrid-main"></div>
    +    <div class="MuiDataGrid-main" role="grid" aria-colcount="5" aria-rowcount="101" aria-multiselectable="false"></div>
       <div class="MuiDataGrid-footerContainer"></div>
     </div>
    ```

  - When the [Tree data](https://next.mui.com/x/react-data-grid/tree-data/) feature is used, the grid role is now `role="treegrid"` instead of `role="grid"`.
  - The Data Grid cells now have `role="gridcell"` instead of `role="cell"`.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

>   - Non-groupable columns can now be grouped programmatically to create read-only row groups by controlling or initializing `rowGroupingModel`, or by updating the `rowGroupingModel` by API method `apiRef.current.setRowGroupingModel`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

  - The buttons in toolbar composable components `GridToolbarColumnsButton`, `GridToolbarFilterButton`, `GridToolbarDensity`, and `GridToolbarExport` are now wrapped with a tooltip component and have a consistent interface. To override some props corresponding to the toolbar buttons or their corresponding tooltips, you can use the `slotProps` prop. Following is an example diff. See [Toolbar section](https://next.mui.com/x/react-data-grid/components/#toolbar) for more details.

    ```diff
      function CustomToolbar() {
        return (
          <GridToolbarContainer>
          <GridToolbarColumnsButton />
          <GridToolbarFilterButton
      -     title="Custom filter" // 🛑 This was previously forwarded to the tooltip component
      +     slotProps={{ tooltip: { title: 'Custom filter' } }} // ✅ This is the correct way now
          />
          <GridToolbarDensitySelector
      -     variant="outlined"    // 🛑 This was previously forwarded to the button component
      +     slotProps={{ button: { variant: 'outlined' } }} // ✅ This is the correct way now
          />
          </GridToolbarContainer>
        );
      }
    ```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - Non-aggregable columns can now be aggregated programmatically to create read-only aggregation rules by controlling or initializing `aggregationModel`, or by updating the `aggregationModel` by API method `apiRef.current.setAggregationModel`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

  +<DataGrid />
  ```

> - The column grouping API methods `getColumnGroupPath` and `getAllGroupDetails` are not anymore prefixed with `unstable_`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The column grouping API methods `getColumnGroupPath` and `getAllGroupDetails` are no longer prefixed with `unstable_`.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Please get rid of slashes before applying the change 🙈 
```suggestion

  \```diff
  -<DataGrid experimentalFeatures={{ columnGrouping: true }} />
  +<DataGrid />
  \```

```

Author: @MBilalShafi FYI: https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/11731#discussion_r1457359987
No need to add '\\' for the blocks in a suggestion. You can just use ```` delimiter when you need to include code blocks in a suggestion! 👍🏼

> - The column grouping selectors `gridFocusColumnGroupHeaderSelector` and `gridTabIndexColumnGroupHeaderSelector` are not anymore prefixed with `unstable_`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The column grouping selectors `gridFocusColumnGroupHeaderSelector` and `gridTabIndexColumnGroupHeaderSelector` are no longer prefixed with `unstable_`.
```

> - The disabled column specific features like `hiding`, `sorting`, `filtering`, `pinning`, `row grouping`, etc could now be controlled programmatically using `initialState`, respective controlled models, or the [API object](https://next.mui.com/x/react-data-grid/api-object/). See [Sorting non-sortable columns programmatically](https://next.mui.com/x/react-data-grid/sorting/#sorting-non-sortable-columns-programmatically) for example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The disabled column specific features like `hiding`, `sorting`, `filtering`, `pinning`, `row grouping`, etc could now be controlled programmatically using `initialState`, respective controlled models, or the [API object](https://next.mui.com/x/react-data-grid/api-object/). See the related [docs](https://next.mui.com/x/react-data-grid/api-object/#access-the-disabled-column-features) section.
```
